// https://github.com/dustypomerleau/eye-notes

chorioretinitis ± uveitis

shortlist
    viral retinitis
    TB
    syphilis
    fungal
        Candida
    Toxoplasma
    sarcoid
    APMPPE
    MC
    birdshot
    MEWDS
    lymphoma

    infectious
        viral
            COMMON:
                CMV
                    findings
                        centrifugal spread of retinitis
                        following a vessel
                            can mimic vasculitis if tightly following vessel branching
                        central clearing where retina is completely necrotic
                        peripheral satellite lesions
                        variable hemorrhage
                    ALWAYS: confirm the diagnosis
                        vitreous OR AC tap for PCR
                            vitreous is usually higher yield
                            send for
                                HSV
                                VZV
                                CMV
                                Toxoplasma
                                    if available
                    medical workup if cause of immunosuppression is not known
                    multidisciplinary approach
                        ID consult
                    treatment
                    // similar discussion of IV versus po as below with ARN
                    // for exam purposes say 1 week IV then po
                        IV ganciclovir 5 mg/kg q 12 hours
                        IV foscarnet 90 mg/kg q 12 hours
                        po valganciclovir 900 mg po bd x 3+ months
                            until CD4 100+ and rising
                        if the disc or macula are threatened
                            foscarnet 2.4 mg/0.1 mL intravitreally q 3 days until quiescent
                        no need for steroids here
                            generally no vitritis until immune reconstitution
                            local immunosuppression is a risk factor for CMV retinitis
                                has been reported multiple times after IVT
                    if not better in 6 weeks consider drug-resistant CMV
                    expect immune reconstitution 3–6 months after starting HAART
                        watch for immune recovery uveitis as CD4 count climbs
                    // barrier laser use similar to ARN below
                HSV
                VZV
                    ARN
                        ARN is a clinical triad
                            vitritis
                                usually with anterior uveitis
                            necrotizing retinitis
                                circumferential spread
                            occlusive vasculitis
                        untreated
                            3/4 develop RD
                            3/4 lose VA to 6/60
                        treatment
                            ADMIT
                            multidisciplinary approach
                                ID consult
                            ALWAYS: confirm the diagnosis
                                vitreous OR AC tap for PCR
                                    vitreous is usually higher yield
                                    send for
                                        HSV
                                        VZV
                                        CMV
                                        Toxoplasma
                                            if available
                                check for immunosuppression
                                    HIV testing
                                    FBC
                                if labs consistent with immunosuppression
                                    consider PORN or CMV
                                check for masquerades
                                    TB
                                    syphilis
                                    fungal retinitis
                                    Toxoplasma
                                    sarcoid
                                    lymphoma
                            classic regimen
                                IV aciclovir 10–15 mg/kg q 8 hours x 1 week
                                then switch to orals at therapeutic dose x 3+ months
                            there is significant evidence for po only
                                plasma concentration not quite as high as IV aciclovir
                                    can achieve nearly the same by doubling the usual dose
                                    not usually necessary to do this
                                    certainly OK for peripheral disease
                                most centers still give IV induction and then switch to po
                                valaciclovir 1 g po tds x 3+ months
                                    assuming good renal function
                                    in poor renal function
                                        adjust dose to avoid CNS toxicity
                                            hallucination
                                            confusion
                                        usually only an issue with doses much higher than 1 g
                                        e.g. immunocompromised patients
                            po prednisolone is debateable but widely used
                                for exam purposes start 0.5–1 mg/kg 2 days after antivirals
                                duration not well defined
                                probably taper after 1 week if disease quiescent
                            aspirin also debateable
                                not usually used
                            topical steroids
                            cycloplegics
                            barrier laser to areas of extremely necrotic retina
                                early PPV not supported by evidence
                            usually use SO if patient needs a PPV
                                not much evidence for this over gas but it's common practice
                            if the disc or macula are threatened
                                foscarnet 2.4 mg/0.1 mL intravitreally q 3 days until quiescent
            ALSO:
                EBV
            RARELY:
                chikungunya
                dengue
                RVF
                rubella
                    CR RARE
                SSPE
                    2° measles
                WNV
                ZIKV
                    mosquito-borne Flavivirus
                    COMMON: Brazil
                    microcephaly
                    CT scan
                        cerebral calcifications
                    CSF
                        ZIKV IgM
                    eye findings
                        pigment mottling
                        macular CRA
                            inflammatory?
                        optic neuropathy
                            disc pallor
                        RARELY: anterior uveitis
        bacterial
            COMMON:
                syphilis
                    ALSO:
                        superficial retinal infiltrates
                            respond to oral steroids
                        placoid lesions
                            extensive EZ loss
                                OCT
                                BAF
                TB
                    if you suspect pulmonary TB but serial sputum doesn't clarify
                        urine PCR + culture can be helpful
                    treatment
                        INH 15 mg/kg
                            weekly
                            max 900 mg
                        rifapentine
                            weekly
                                300 mg up to 14 kg
                                450 mg up to 25 kg
                                600 mg up to 32 kg
                                750 mg up to 50 kg
                                900 mg for 50+ kg
            ALSO:
                Bartonella
                    CR RARE
                        usually neuroretinitis
                Lyme
                    CR RARE
                    usually
                        vitritis
                        vasculitis
                        neuroretinitis
                RMSF
                    Rickettsia
                    CR RARE
                        usually neuroretinitis
                endogenous endophthalmitis
                    // see anterior-and-intermediate-uveitis.txt
        fungal
            COMMON:
                OHS
                Candida
                Aspergillus
            ALSO:
                Blastomyces
                Coccidioides
                Cryptococcus
                Pneumocystis
                Pseudallescheria
                Sporothrix
        protozoa
            Toxoplasma
                //...
                RARELY: iris nodules
        helminths
            DUSN
                often young patients
                    average onset in the teens
                vision loss
                floaters
                COMMON:
                    vitritis
                    clustered yellow-white lesions
                ALSO:
                    RAPD
                    disc edema
                reported small nematodes:
                    Toxocara canis
                    Ancylostoma caninum
                    Strongyloides stercoralis
                    Ascaris lumbricoides
                reported large nematode:
                    Baylisascaris procyonis
                treatment
                    laser the worm
            Toxocara (canis OR catis)
                COMMON:
                    unilateral
                    children
                    ocular
                        COMMON: single larva causes a granuloma
                        ALSO: panuveitis
                            vitritis
                            periphlebitis
                        RARELY: isolated anterior uveitis
                ALSO: visceral
                    abdominal pain
                    headache
                    cough
                    organ involvement
                        brain
                        heart
                        muscle
                diagnosis
                    COMMON: appearance + serum IgG
                        ELISA with reflex western blot
                    ALSO: aqueous or vitreous IgG
                treatment
                    if active
                        antihelminthics
                            albendazole
                                10 mg/kg/d x 5 days
                            thiabendazole
                            mebendazole
                        ± corticosteroids
                            oral
                            topical
                            periocular
                    aggressive peripheral granulomas
                        cryo
                        laser
        larval
            RARELY: ophthalmomyiasis
    inflammatory
        inflammatory
            sarcoid
                when presenting as MC ± P
                    TB and sarcoid are nearly indistinguishable
                    always consider them together with that phenotype
            WDS
                COMMON:
                    APMPPE
                        scotomas
                        photopsias
                        mild vitreous cells
                        placoid lesions
                            FFA
                                block early
                                stain late
                            FAF
                                dark acutely
                                bright during evolution
                                    ~ 5 days                mottled dark + bright chronically
                            OCT
                                OR lesions
                                    loculated
                                    reflective debris
                                    VKH-like
                            fade over 2 weeks
                        usually bilateral but onset may be asymmetric
                        if
                            HA
                            focal neurologic deficit
                                MRI for cerebral vasculitis
                    birdshot
                        COMMON: women
                        poor vision
                            especially at night
                            subjectively worse than the VA
                        scotomas
                        mild vitritis
                            nearly always present
                        white dots radiate from the nerve
                            show up poorly on FFA but well on ICG
                        ALSO: retinal vasculitis
                            so still worth getting the FFA
                            may have late disc leak
                        check A29
                        SSIMT
                            cyclosporine
                            azathioprine
                        late complications
                            CME
                            CNV
                            field loss
                            reduced ERG
                            night blindness
                        follow
                            HVF
                            ERG
                            ± ICG

/*
From Katherine Zamecki & Doug Jabs (2010) RE: the value of A29 in diagnosing
Birdshot:

The problem with using HLA typing diagnostically is illustrated in the case of
BSCR. BSCR is associated with HLA-A29, and 85% to 95% of patients with BSCR
possess HLA-A29, with an overall estimate of 90%. HLA-A29 is present in
approximately 7.7% of the general population, and BSCR has among the highest
relative odds of any HLA-associated disease. BSCR accounts for approximately
7% of posterior uveitis, and some clinicians advocate screening patients with
posterior uveitis with HLA-A29 to diagnose BSCR. The problem with this
approach is illustrated by Table 2, which shows the results of this strategy
applied to 1000 patients with posterior uveitis. Despite the tight association
of BSCR with HLA-A29, the positive predictive value of HLA-A29 is less than
50%, which means that diagnosing BSCR based on HLA-A29 results is wrong more
often than it is right. If all uveitis patients were screened (as opposed to
just posterior uveitis), the positive predictive value would be even lower,
because the prevalence of BSCR is even lower among all patients with uveitis
than it is among those with posterior uveitis. One could improve the positive
predictive value of HLA-A29 testing by using it only in those situations where
the patient had a multifocal choroiditis with yellow-orange ovoid spots,
vitreous cells, no anterior chamber cells, and no evidence for syphilis, Lyme
disease, or sarcoid. However, regardless of the HLA-A29 result, that patient
would be diagnosed with BSCR (5% to 15% of patients with BSCR are HLA-A29
negative), so the test adds little to the diagnosis in this situation, either.
*/

                    MEWDS
                        COMMON:
                            mildly myopic women
                            unilateral
                        blurred vision
                        scotomas
                        photopsias
                        1/3 have a viral prodrome
                        COMMON:
                            posterior small dots
                            late foveal granularity
                        ALSO:
                            mild vitreous cell
                            hyperemic disc
                        RARELY: RAPD
                        FFA
                            bright early and late
                            dots within the dots
                        NIR
                            dots within the dots
                        OCT
                            PR disruption
                                COMMON:
                                    subfoveal
                                    resolves spontaneously
                                        weeks to months
                        ICG
                            blocking defects corresponding to the white dots
                                most obvious in lates
                    MC ± P // includes PIC
                        COMMON: women
                        vitritis variable
                            hence ± P
                        lesions are punched out
                            think OHS + inflammation
                        FFA
                            block early
                            stain late
                        secondary CNV
                            can occur in almost any inflammatory choroiditis
                            inflammatory CNV may send extensions into the retina
                                pitchfork sign
                    serpiginous
                        COMMON:
                            young or middle-aged men
                            bilateral
                        macular
                        PP
                        FFA
                            block early
                            late staining at the borders
                        FAF
                            bright when active
                            dark once burned out
                RARELY:
                    AMN
                        young patients
                            30s is typical
                                AOT PAMM where mean age is 60
                        90+% female
                        acute paracentral scotoma
                        COMMON:
                            normal appearing fundus
                            bilateral
                        OCT
                            lesions confined to outer retina
                                typically
                                    OPL-ONL junction
                                    ONL
                                EZ may appear attenuated
                                    AOT PAMM where typical lesions are in the INL
                                        deep capillary plexus bounds the INL
                                            15–70 µm below the ILM surface
                                        // superficial capillary plexus is in the NFL + GCL
                        shares some features with PAMM
                            IR
                                dark wedges
                            risk factors
                                vasopressor exposure
                                    caffeine
                        COMMON: no systemic disease
                        RARELY:
                            trauma
                            pregnancy
                        AOT PAMM which has many systemic associations
                            ocular
                                RAO
                                CRVO
                                retinal vasculitis
                                Purtscher retinopathy
                            systemic
                                DM
                                HTN
                                sickle cell
                                migraine HA
                                hypovolemia
                                viral URI
                            medications
                                amphetamines
                                vasopressors
                                caffeine
                                oral contraceptives
                                H1N1 vaccine
                    ARPE
                    AZOOR
                        includes AIBSES
                        central photopsia + scotoma
                        confined to outer retina
                        lesions not visible OR
                        white demarcation line
                            usually hyperFAF
                        patchy hyperFAF spots progress to hypoFAF spots
                        EZ loss on OCT
                    SFU
                        may be on a continuum with MC ± P
                    persistent placoid maculopathy
                        may be on a continuum with APMPPE or serpiginous
                        COMMON: bilateral
                        macular pigmentary changes
                        barely visible white deposits
                            prominently hyperFAF
                            block early and stain late on FFA
                        OCT
                            APMPPE-like
                            OR disruption
                            SRD
                            SRF
                        final VA may be OK
                        treatment
                            observe OR
                            systemic prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day
                                benefit isn't clear given the rarity of the condition
        autoimmune
            COMMON:
                VKH
            RARELY:
                SO
                lupus
        vasculitis
            Behcet
                occlusive vasculitis predominates
                RARELY: retinal whitening

    idiopathic

    neoplastic
        lymphoproliferative
            PIOL
                broad age range
                    usually 40+ but adolescents and infants have been reported
                look for leopard spot RPE pigmentation over a SR infiltrate ± vitritis
                    easily confused with
                        MC ± P
                        TB
                        sarcoid
                1/3 of apparent PIOL have PCNSL when you work them up
                1/2+ of PIOL will develop PCNSL within 2 years
                testing
                    OCT
                        confirms the absence of CME
                        confirms level of SR or SRPE infiltrate
                    FFA
                        SR infiltrate tends to block choroidal fluorescence
                        late staining of the pigmentary change
                        typical inflammatory findings are usually absent
                            no CME
                            no vasculitis
                    BSUS helpful in visualising SR infiltrates in cases of dense vitritis
                    LP with CSF cytology for lymphoma cells
                    MRI ± gad
                        lesions
                            dark on T1
                            bright on T2
                    bloods
                        FBC
                        HIV
                        testing to rule out clinically suspected DDx above
                    vitreous biopsy
                        only perform if MRI + LP is not definitive
                        exact analysis techniques depend on your center
                            cytology
                            immunohistochemistry
                            flow cytometry
                            PCR analysis for known oncogene translocations
                        if the vitreous biopsy is negative and there are SR cells
                            retinotomy with SR aspirate is an option
                            the most common site of activity is actually the SRPE space
                                hence the pigmentary changes overlying the lesion
                        get setup for rapid transportation and processing of the sample
                            lymphoma cells start to degrade within an hour
                            preservatives can be added to try and delay this
                treatment
                    systemic methotrexate
                        ± Ara-C OR radiotherapy
                        COMMON: IV
                        ALSO: intrathecal
                    intravitreal methotrexate 0.4 mg/0.1 mL for local control
                        may require a large number of injections
                            depends on concurrent effect of systemic therapy
                        sample regimen
                            twice a week for 4 weeks
                            weekly for 8 weeks
                            monthly for 9 months
                            total injections = 25
            PCNSL
                COMMON: diffuse large B-cell NHL
            metastatic spread of systemic lymphoma
                key difference
                    PIOL/PCNSL lymphoma cells mostly in the vitreous + retina/SR space
                    metastatic lymphoma cells are mostly in the uvea
                        these differences aren't absolute but help guide clinical suspicion
                        primary uveal lymphoma is possible but RARE
            can masquerade as WDS OR retinal dystrophy
                peripheral pigmentary changes
                reduced ERG
        hematologic
            RARELY: leukemia
                usually
                    IRH
                    CWS
        metastatic
            COMMON:
                lung CA
                breast CA
                prostate CA
            usually mets to choroid
                true retinal mets are RARE but reported


//


short DDx for CR + vitritis AKA "headlight in the fog"
    ARN
    syphilis
    Toxoplasma
    lymphoma
    // add others from above DDx as appropriate
