// https://github.com/dustypomerleau/eye-notes

//... format to match eye-notes style
//... add or reference DME data from DR.txt

DME
    Eylea
        VISTA
        VIVID
        confirm that laser patients don't have the same vision gains as antiVEGF
            // see Dilsher Dhoot's post-hoc analysis from ASRS 2016

BRVO
    VIBRANT (2015)
        Eylea versus grid
            rescue laser allowed in either group
        @ 6 months Eylea doubled the number of 3-line gainers compared to baseline grid
            1/2 versus 1/4

CRVO
    GALILEO (2014)
        Eylea versus sham
        @ 6 months Eylea tripled the number of 3-line gainers compared to sham
            60% versus 22%

bvos

keep in mind that bvos didn't give us much help on the timing of treating acute
bvo because they only enrolled people 3 m after onset of bvo.

grid laser to macular edema doubled the number of patients who improved their
vision.

scatter laser to the nonperfused area in patients without nv cut the risk of nv
in half. scatter laser to the nonperfused area in patients who already had nv
cut the risk of vh in half. BUT the risk of vh was similar (around 60%) in those
who were lasered prophylactically but still developed nv and in those who were
lasered after nv developed. the bvos was not designed to determine the best
timing for scatter (before or after nv) and so we are comparing across groups in
the study to guess at it. therefore summary is - scatter only if nv develops,
but the bvos left a lot of unanswered questions about whether the degree of
nonperfusion should influence when you do scatter etc. fortunately the patients
who bled had low rates of sig visual loss, which makes us more comfortable
leaning toward observation rather than prophylactic laser.



cvos

eyes that do worse are those that present with poor vision or lots of
nonperfusion - also duration of CRVO 4- weeks is more likely to progress to
ischemic and more likely to develop nvg.

grid reduces angiographic macular edema but doesn't improve vision.

saving prp for those eyes that actually develop nvi/nva makes it more effective
when you need it - this is the major rationale for not doing prophylactic prp
(there was a trend toward prophylactic prp preventing nvi/nva but it wasn't
statistically significant and so the issue of getting max effect in those
patients who actually have iris nv takes precedence). in addition, prp didn't
change the visual acuity outcomes either (a third lost vision - just like
controls), which is another rationale for waiting until nvi/nva develops.


score bvo

ivt didn't help me secondary to bvo when compared to grid alone - 30% gained 3 lines
regardless of treatment group.


score cvo

q4m ivt (patients were retreated every 4 m for a year unless they had iop spike
or they resolved completely i.e. 20/25 flat macula) quadrupled the number of
3-line gainers (30% gained 3 lines versus 7%). 1 mg worked just as well as 4 mg
with fewer side effects.


bravo

over first 6 m, 55% of lucentis patients versus 30% of sham gained 15 letters
(bravo patients were eligible for rescue laser in the first 6 m, but i don't
know what percentage of subjects and controls actually got laser).


cruise

over first 6 m, 46% of lucentis patients versus 17% of sham gained 15 letters
(everyone, including controls did much better in cruise than in score cvo -
remember only 7% of score cvo controls gained 15 letters).


awaiting published results of bravo and cruise for true analysis, but for the
moment best practice pattern seems to be:

bvo - no scatter unless nv develops. if me, then start with avastin and then
grid if response is incomplete or lacks durability (supplementing with avastin
as needed). ivt is not proven to have benofit so would use as a last resort if
other options are not working at all.

cvo - no prp unless nv develops. if me, then start with avastin and then ivt if
response is incomplete. would not give steroid more often than q4m, but would
use avastin as often as q6w over the first year or so. grid is not proven to
have benefit so would use as a last resort if other options are not working at
all.
