// https://github.com/dustypomerleau/eye-notes

history
    gradual onset
        compressive
        toxic
        hereditary
            very slow (years)
    TVOs
        seconds long
        with change in body position
        suspicious for high ICP
        look for papilledema
            ask about pulse synchronous tinnitus (PST)
    color vision
        in macular disease
            poor color vision usually comes with poor VA
        if VA is only down a little but color is poor
            very likely to be optic neuropathy
        red desats
            faded
            pink
            washed out
    difference in brightness
        ask patient during swinging penlight
        subjective confirmation of objective RAPD in subtle cases
    distinguish true papilledema from pseudopapilledema
        true papilledema
            HA
                worse
                    lying down
                    in the morning
            other neuro symptoms
                weakness
                ataxia
                incontinence
                diplopia
                cognitive problems
            NFL swelling obscures retinal vessels
            NFL hemorrhage
            CWS
            exudates
            no SVP
            may have diplopia
                early CN6P with elevated ICP
                // see ET.txt for discussion of the 6 syndromes of CN6P
            RNFL OCT
                thickened
            FFA
                disc leak
            HVF
                enlarged blind spot
        pseudopapilledema
            disc drusen
                ALWAYS: confirm suspected disc drusen by BSUS
                    high reflectivity persists even at low gain
                exposed drusen are fluorescent on RF photos and FAF
                    usually not exposed in young patients
                    FAF better than RF
                        may pick up drusen slightly deeper
                bilateral disc swelling in the setting of disc drusen
                    does NOT preclude intracranial pathology
                    if there is disc edema
                        scan them
            high hyperopia
            SVP present
                or VP easily induced when you put pressure on the eye
            RNFL OCT
                normal or thinned
            FFA
                no disc leak
    ALWAYS:
        HVF even if CVF are normal
            for any suspected ON
            including other CNPs where lesion location could threaten ON
        check Hertels if you suspect CON
        if you suspect papilledema
            BSUS to rule out drusen
            check BP for malignant HTN
            MRI
                unless it's post traumatic
                    CT will rule out an acute bleed
                CT also good when MRI is not available quickly
            MRV
                DVST
                    can be 2°
                        infectious meningitis
                        Behcet disease
                        hypercoagulable states
                            lupus
                            protein C & S deficiency
                            antithrombin 3 deficiency
                            antiphospholipid Ab syndrome
                            pregnancy or postpartum
                            oral contraceptives
                        lymphoma
                    NEVER: diagnose IIH until you have ruled out DVST
            if the MR studies are normal
                LP
                    IIH
                        NOTE: specifically request opening pressure
                        can be 2°
                            DAMS
                                excessive vitamin A
                                steroid withdrawal
                                isoretinoin family of drugs
                                cyclosporine
                                tetracyclines
                            sarcoid
                            lupus
                            Behcet
                    meningitis
        Lee approach to papilledema
            complete ocular and neurologic exam
            Is there an exogenous cause?
                medication-induced IIH as above
            Are there risk factors for DVST?
                trauma
                hypercoagulable states // see above
            Do they fit the demographic for IIH?
                young, obese female
                neurologic findings can be explained by elevated ICP alone
                obtain MRI + MRV
                    if DVST
                        ADMIT
                        neurology consultation
                        anticoagulation
                            usually heparin
                            if there is neurologic decompensation on heparin
                                RARELY: endovascular recanalization
                    if the MRI + MRV are negative
                        LP with opening pressure and CSF analysis
                            if CSF normal and high opening pressure
                                treat as IIH
                                    Diamox 1 g daily in 2–4 divided doses
                                        titrate to a max of 4 g daily
                                            may be limited by adverse effects
                                                tingling
                                                lethargy
                                                altered taste
                                                dehydration
                                                hypokalemia
                                                    monitor UEC
                                                ALWAYS: counsel the patient about these
                                            debate about use of Diamox in pregnancy
                                                animal studies showed teratogenicity at very high doses
                                                currently category C
                                                no human studies have backed this up
                                                many different approaches
                                                    reduce dose
                                                    avoid during first 1/3
                                                    avoid entirely
                                        assuming neurologic signs have been controlled
                                            HA is the major quality of life issue in IIH
                                                topiramate is helpful
                                        refractory cases
                                            if HA is the 1° issue
                                            ± worsening VF
                                                CSF diversion procedures
                                                VS stenting OR angioplasty
                                                    despite lack of true DVST in IIH
                                            if vision loss is the 1° issue
                                                VF constriction
                                                central acuity loss
                                                as a general rule
                                                    EBS is not considered the same as vision loss
                                            + ICP controlled
                                                ONSD
                                                    does not help with ICP or HA
            papilledema in the presence of fever
                intracranial abscess
                    ring enhancing lesion on CT
                    bright DWI on MRI
                    FBC may be normal
                        don't let this throw you
                    causes
                        COMMON: spread of a middle ear infection
                        ALSO: septic emboli
                            heart valve
                            piercings
                            dental surgery
                        bugs
                            Staph. spp.
                            Strep. spp.
                            H. flu
                            Enterobacter
                            ...
                infectious meningitis


//


optic neuropathy DDx // lengthy list of rare causes below

    infectious
        viral
            HSV
            VZV // usually followed by ARN
            Lyme
            hep B
            hep C
            ZIKV // see chorioretinitis.txt
            post-vaccination demyelinating disease
                COMMON: yellow fever vaccine
        bacterial
            TB
            syphilis
            bartonella
                usually as neuroretinitis
        fungal
            fungal infiltrative ON
                usually during orbital infection
                    COMMON:
                        Aspergillus
                        Mucor
        helminths
            DUSN

    inflammatory
        inflammatory
            sarcoid
        autoimmune
            TED compressive ON
            MS
            NMO
                ±
                    lupus
                    Sjogren syndrome
            postinfectious demyelinating disease
                usually post-viral
            IBD
            RA
            relapsing polychondritis
                cartilagenous structures inflamed
                    ears
                        cauliflower ear
                    nose
                    larynx
                        speech difficulties
                    trachea
                    joints
                    severe cases
                        cardiovascular inflammation
                        renal failure
            PMR
                painful morning stiffness
                    shoulders
                    pelvic girdle
                synovitis
        vasculitis
            GCA
                symptoms
                    localized HA
                    jaw claudication
                        by far the most specific for GCA
                        maxillary artery ischemia to the masseter muscle
                    scalp tenderness
                        Does it hurt to comb your hair or shampoo?
                    TA pain with palpation
                        may be visibly bulging
                    diplopia
                    acute vision loss
                    TMVL
                    constitutional symptoms
                        fever
                        weight loss
                    PMR symptoms
                        painful morning stiffness
                            shoulders
                            pelvic girdle
                        synovitis
                            swollen, spongy knees or elbows
                1990 ACR GCA criteria (3+/5)
                    age 50+
                    new onset localized HA
                    abnormal superficial temporal artery
                        tenderness
                        reduced pulsation
                        beading
                        nodularity
                    ESR 50+
                        alternative, more specific formulas
                            Miller
                                men (age)/2
                                women (age + 10)/2
                            Hayreh
                                men 0.18(age) + 17.3
                                women 0.18(age) + 22.1
                    abnormal TAB
                        technique
                            try to palpate the TA first
                                feel just in front of where the pinnae takes off superiorly
                                very difficult to find if you can't palpate it
                                feel both sides and go for the easiest to feel
                                generally in front of or straight up from the ear
                                    main branch of the TA runs vertically in front of the ear
                                    parietal branch arches back over the ear
                                    frontal branch angles forward up to the forehead
                                    most biopsies are taken from the frontal branch
                                some surgeons use a doppler probe to confirm
                            shave away the overlying hair
                            mark the path of the artery on the overlying skin
                            infiltrate with 2% lidocaine
                                stay parallel to the vessels in the skin
                                going deep can hit the vessels and cause a large hematoma
                            cut down over the artery
                                don't go deep at this point
                            lift the edge of the incision
                                use scissors to cut the full thickness of the skin
                                blunt dissect beneath the skin to make a pocket as you go
                            cauterize to obtain hemostasis
                            stretch the incision with 2 rakes
                            lift the fascial layer and open it with scissors
                                TA is immediately below the fascia
                            expose the top and bottom of the TA
                                make a pocket beneath the TA with your scissors
                                you don't need to clean the middle portion
                                feel the artery and confirm pulsation
                                    you don't want to get vein accidentally
                            pass 4–0 vicryl needle backwards under the TA in both sites & tie
                                or you can pass artery forceps under and retrieve the suture
                                2+ cm is best
                                you can tie off tributaries at this point if they are obvious
                            cut the TA segment out inside the sutures
                                if it bleeds look for tributaries that must also be tied off
                            close the scalp
                                interrupted subcuticular 6–0 vicryl
                                steri strips on the skin
                        findings
                            lymphocytes
                            epithelioid histiocytes
                            giant cells
                            loss of the internal elastic lamina
                        if clinical suspicion is high and the TAB is negative
                            TAB the other side
                            you are committing them to months or years of therapy
                            it's important to be sure
                        other options
                            unilateral frozen section
                                2nd side only if the frozen is negative
                            bilateral biopsy
                                some centers do this as an SOP
                    using only ACR criteria has a high false positive rate
                        up to 40% have a negative TAB despite scoring 3+/5
                Additional GCA tests
                    FBC with platelets 400k+/µL
                    CRP 5+ mg/L
                        some references will say CRP 0.5+
                            they are referring to mg/dL
                        normal ~ 5- mg/L
                        abnormal ~ 10+ mg/L
                    TA duplex US
                    TA MRI
                        looks for vessel wall thickening and stenosis
                    aortic PET-CT
                        only good for large, extracranial vessels
                        not useful on the TA itself
                    NOTE: patients with CRAO suspicious for GCA still need a carotid US
                AAION
                    pallid swelling
                    CWS
                treatment
                    systemic steroids
                        1+ mg/kg po prednisolone
                        value of IV steroids isn't clear
                            with severe vision loss
                                ADMIT for IVMP
                                    1 g daily until stabilized
                        ASA OK
                            common practice
                                because platelet levels tend to be elevated
                            no specific evidence for this
                ESR 90+ DDx
                    infectious
                        bacterial
                            TB
                            syphilis
                            BROADLY:
                                osteomyelitis
                                endocarditis
            GPA
            PAN

    idiopathic
        IIH
        anomalous discs with false appearance of ON

    iatrogenic
        iatrogenic
            radiation
            // see medications below
        surgical
            surgical traumatic ON
            retrobulbar block trauma

    vascular
        vasoocclusive
            NAION
        aneurysmal
            aneurysmal compressive ON

    neoplastic
        solid tumors
            compressive ON
                COMMON:
                    meningioma
                        COMMON: sphenoid wing meningioma
                            hyperostosis on CT
                                can also be seen with bony tumors below
                                AOT malignant lacrimal tumors and mets
                                    can be lytic OR hyperostotic
                            typically middle-aged women
                            grow 1–3 mm/y
                            treatment
                                observe if you can
                                if the nerve is functionally compromised you'll need to treat
                                    surgical resection
                                        mainstay in the sphenoid wing location
                                            unlike ONSM below
                                        systemic steroids along with resection
                                    radiation
                                        FSRT
                                        IMRT
                                        particle radiotherapy AKA proton beam
                                        stereotactic radiosurgery
                    pituitary adenoma
                ALSO:
                    other bony tumors of the sphenoid ridge
                        osteoma
                        fibrous dysplasia
                        ossifying fibroma
                        malignant lacrimal gland tumor
                        mets
            intrinsic tumors of the ON
                COMMON:
                    optic glioma
                    optic nerve sheath meningioma (ONSM)
                        middle-aged women
                        younger kids with NF2
                        tram track sign
                        radiotherapy is the mainstay
                            EBRT
                            FSRT
                            IMRT
                            ...
                        surgical resection nearly always ends in blindness
                            almost never operate
                            may debulk in some cases where the vision is lost already
                        histopathology is similar to other meningiomas
                            meningothelial whorls
                            ± psammoma bodies
        lymphoproliferative
            lymphoma infiltrative ON
            orbital lymphoma compressive ON
        hematologic
            leukemia
                infiltrative ON
                    COMMON: retrolaminar infiltration
                        disc swelling is variable
                        congested retinal vessels
                            RVO
                            RAO
                            IR hemorrhages
                        vision loss can be severe
                    ALSO: anterior infiltration of the disc
                        fluffy, white infiltrate in the substance of the disc
                        vision loss is mild
                    ALWAYS: confirm that the patient does not have papilledema
                        leukemia can infiltrate the meninges and increase ICP
                            LP would show WBC
                    treatment for infiltrative ON
                        oncology consult
                        orbital radiotherapy often very effective acutely
                        chemotherapy
                        immunotherapy
                orbital compressive ON
        metastatic
            carcinomatous ON
                COMMON:
                    breast
                    lung
                    melanoma
            paraneoplastic ON // see Mayo clinic panel in dystrophies-retinal.txt
                COMMON: lung
                ALSO: CAR with ON

    DAMS
        drugs
            methanol
            ethylene glycol
            (tobacco exacerbates nutritional ON)
        alcohol
            causes nutritional ON
        medications // see list below
            chemotherapy
            ethambutol
            isoniazid (INH)
            amiodarone
            BROADLY: TNFI
                including Golimumab
                may have demyelinating features

    degenerative
        degenerative
            nutritional ON
                COMMON:
                    B12 deficiency
                    folate deficiencies
                    thiamine (B1) deficiency
                        limited EOM
                        ataxia
                        confusion

    genetic
        inherited
            AD dominant optic atrophy
            mitochondrial LHON
                young men
                progressive
                    bilateral VA 6/60-
                pseudoedema
                peripapillary telangiectasia
                arteriolar tortuosity
                mitochondrial inheritance
                    only women transmit
                    if no FH: MRI
                LHON+
                    tremors
                    cardiac conduction defects

    endocrine
        endocrine
            DM papillopathy
            DM NAION

    trauma
        traumatic ON

    neurologic
        glaucoma


/*
long lists for reference (please don't try and memorize this)

Infectious causes: There are case reports linking viruses to direct damage of
the optic nerve. These include measles, mumps, rubella; chickenpox,
chikungunya, coxsackie B5, cytomegalovirus, dengue fever (hemorrhagic),
echovirus type 5, Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis A and B, herpes zoster, human
herpes virus-6B, HIV, HTLV-1, infectious mononucleosis, parvovirus, varicella,
and variola (Farris and Pickard 1990; Chan 2002). West Nile virus can
sometimes cause bilateral optic neuritis, but the predominant lesions are
hemorrhage, vitreitis, chorioretinitis, uveitis, and occlusive retinal
vasculitis. Some cases of optic neuritis follow the virus infection by a
month, suggesting a postinfectious encephalomyelitis or virus-induced optic
neuritis. Influenza infections are associated with optic neuritis in
individual reports. Direct damage can be caused by tuberculosis, sarcoidosis,
fungus such as Aspergillus, Cryptococcus, mucor (mucormycosis), Toxoplasma
gondii; Lyme disease, Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi), syphilis (Lesser et
al 1990; Jacobson et al 1991), mycoplasma pneumonia (Nadkarni and Lisak 1993);
cysticercosis, toxocariasis; anthrax, bartonellosis, borreliosis, brucellosis,
cat-scratch disease (Bartonella henslae), Coxiella burnetii (Q fever),
ehrlichiosis, familial Mediterranean fever, leprosy, malaria, meningococcal
infection, purulent leptomeningitis, tularemia, typhoid, or Whipple disease (
Tropheryma whipplei).


Meds: These include antineoplastic agents (Ara-C, carboplatin, cisplatin,
5-fluorouracil, nitrosourea, paclitaxel, vincristine), amiodarone, carbon
monoxide, chloramphenicol, chlorpropamide, cimetidine, clioquinol, cyanide
(cassava roots), cyclosporine, dapsone, desferrioxamine, disulfiram, linezolid (oxazolidinone antibiotic), ethambutol, ethylene glycol (antifreeze),
isoniazid, methanol, phenothiazines, possibly quinolone antibiotics,
sildenafil (transient blue vision, but also anterior ischemic optic
neuropathy), styrene vapor, tacrolimus (FK-506), trichloroethylene, and
toluene (from glue sniffing, solvent abuse) (Kerrison 2004). One case was seen
with imatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Soluble tumor necrosis factor
receptor-immunoglobulin fusion protein that captures tumor necrosis factor
(etanercept) and antibodies to tumor necrosis factor (adalimumab, infliximab)
may trigger optic neuritis, as well as multiple sclerosis.
*/
